---
layout: post
title:  "Thoughts on <em>Internet's Own Boy</em>"
date:   2014-08-31 13:19:16
comments: true
---

Copyright is one of the most heavily debated topics on the whole internet. Establishing a new set of ideas and beliefs on what conduct is just and what is not that suits the modern way of how information flows from place to place is vastly delicate and complex. It is in most cases extremely hard to draw an unambiguous line between right and wrong, minor misconduct and serious violation of basic principles. But we can start with the simple ones first.

1. Stealing is wrong. 
2. The trick lies in how you define “stealing”.
3. Piracy for profit is stealing.
4. Authors and creators own their intellectual property and should, by all standards, justly get paid if they desire so. 
5. Many people say, the world has changed. The whole concept of copyright is outdated. In my opinion, they are certainly right.
6. Creative Commons is good. GPL is good. But I don't enthusiastically endorse the hacker culture or the idea of open source. I tend to believe that good things are most often created when the creators get paid for them. Linux can almost never have the perfect design of iOS and GIMP is not going to replace Photoshop anytime soon. I buy Apple, not Android. I enjoy using good stuff. I do seriously enjoy TeX and wish to contribute to the community if I had the time and ability, though. 
7. If you wrote an answer on your own blog or douban.com or zhihu.com and some user at weibo.com or renren.com copied it despite your disapproval of doing so, that person is doing wrong.
8. If you download songs/movies/books from Meepo (if you are a student at Tsinghua) or eMule or gen.lib.rus.ec simply because you don't want to pay for them, you are doing wrong.
9. I have been doing this. I know I shouldn't.
10. But if what you are downloading are textbooks, it becomes a little bit more controversial than if you download, say, the latest album by Justin Timberlake or Malcolm Gladwell's new book. This is because, 1) the market for textbooks is not a completely free one, which makes the current price for textbooks in the United States unreasonably and even unbearably high for many students, especially those from outside the U.S., and 2) education is not something that should be completely marketized or commercialized in many people's belief, and that makes some sense, at least. See, even simple things as these become tricky very soon after you enter a conversation.
11. Generally, things get complicated when academics and education are involved. The academic world has always been free and open to anyone willing to climb the ladder of knowledge and make their contribution to this grand database of human civilization. We treasure this invaluable database. The very idea of its existence stands for something. This is both what the path of our history has been and what we most people think is just. We, as humans, though often unworthy and ignoble as we are, have always had the tradition of believing in that the faint sparkles of the wildest idealistic will finally shape everybody's future. The academic world is the most proper place to try out this belief and the most likely to succeed in history and in future.
12. The current prices for access to academic articles and journals and the profits companies like Elsevier and Springer make every year are ridiculous. Not only Aaron Swartz thought so, but it's also the consensus among a great percentage of researchers and university libraries in the world. Even authors of these papers don't even get a penny directly from the publishing of them. They are funded by taxpayers. We had never trusted our invaluable knowledge database to a handful of for-profit private companies in most of our history, and whether this should be the case is heavily debatable. These companies don't seem to be going along quite well with our beliefs and visions for the academic world.
13. However, the world of science is not that free after all. To do science requires a toll. A high one. That is the price for receiving proper scientific training, and, sometimes more importantly, being immersed in such an environment and communicating with the rest of the academic society. Without the training, immersion and communication, a person with a strong curiosity would most likely become a 民科 instead of the 14-year-old boy mentioned at the end of the film who came up with a way for diagnosing early pancreatic cancer.
14. These prerequisites – proper education, family support, guidance in the right direction, etc., which often require an at least middle class family in a relatively better off part of the world – are in fact the most common doorsills that keep talented and willing people outside the academic world, and they are also the hardest ones to cross.
15. Nevertheless, it makes no sense that #12 is our reality now.
16. AARON SWARTZ DID NOT COMMIT ANY FELONY. Let alone 13 of them.
17. This is plainly *ridiculous*. Just open a fucking dictionary and turn to the page where the fucking word “felony” is. Read aloud the definition. Then read aloud the examples of felonies: MURDER, RAPE, ARSON, ARMED ROBBERY. Does “downloading all the articles from a commercial database with no evidence showing the intent of utilizing them for profit” fit into your criteria of “violent and severe crimes” like those words above? The prosecutors obviously think so. I literally laughed out loud when I saw this. So did some of the persons interviewed in the film. This is as absurd as it is tragic.
18. There are a lot of similar topics that can trigger fierce debates and even polemics in the film. However, there are also things that you simply know can't be right in any sense, like the indictment of Aaron for this. There are also things that smell really fishy but you might not be able to defend yourself quite well if you are caught up in a debate about it, like whether this idea of “making an example out of someone” and imposing on him severe penalties in order to frighten potential future violators is justified. This is probably not very just for the unlucky guy. What's more important, the ambiguity, and thus the uncertainty that results, creates fear, while it is exactly this fear of the government, of the law enforcement agencies that modern political ideologies and their practitioners, especially the founding fathers of the U.S., fought hard against. The fear makes you retreat and voluntarily squeeze your own room of act, speech, and most crucially, thought, thus unconsciously curtailing your freedom and rights little by little. But on the other hand, one might ask, how else are you going to stop those outrageous users who download tens of TBs of pirated movies and share them publicly? This “making an example” method is exactly how they deal with personal copyright violators now, and it seems to be working. The debate goes on.
19. Finally, the single most unclear and broad issue in it: whether the whole idea of civil disobedience is right or wrong.
20. One more thing: you have to take a stand in matters like these. You are forced to do so, because you are in this. Not doing anything is already taking a stand, which is, in this case like what MIT did, equivalent to supporting the establishment, the old world. Aaron took his stand, and he paid for this. His ex-girlfriend took her stand, and she saw the outcome. You do not have to be 100% sure of yourself, because you simply can't. You just have to choose, and act, and wait for how things unfold tomorrow. My stance? I support Aaron Swartz. Not that I completely agree with him on everything he had done, but this has to be my choice if I have to make one. And I do. We all do.

### On Aaron Swartz himself

Aaron is a prodigy, no doubt. To quote a user's words from the discussions in the new Douban app: 「RSS, Markdown, reddit, web.py, Creative Commons, anti-SOPA. 这几个跟他有直接关系的项目或者事件，每个拿出来都够其他人说一辈子。」And most of these he accomplished in his teens and early twenties. 

The internet is lively and vigorous enough to attain its own life path, character, and even, its own child. Aaron Swartz is the internet's own boy. The warmth and tender affection in this title as much as the sadness in the film makes it nearly untranslatable. The Chinese title 互联网之子 does not convey so much subtlety. You should watch it if you haven't.

### On public power

This is just to give some context to those who don't understand how terrifying the American police system is, or rather, all police systems are in human history. First, understand that the police is a hundred times more powerful than you, a mere citizen. They have a huge tank of resources they can wield against you, just as in this movie. Second, FBI is no regular police. Even regular police can legally shoot you with a gun if they think their lives are at threat, not to mention investigative agencies like that. Police is indeed terrifying to most people. This is why the early judicial elites of the U.S. tried so hard to make sure citizens don't have to suffer unjust penalties, tortures and other types of abuse of power with procedures like Miranda Rights, rule of exclusion of evidence, etc.

Still, when we were visiting Washington, DC last year during the government shutdown and experienced a minor protest/demonstration, we met one girl who was among the leading row of people marching against the handful of peacefully watching policemen up the steps in front of the closed Lincoln's Memorial. She told us that she was “really scared”, “didn't know what they would do to us”. She said she stood up because she believed she was doing the right thing. They have power, and that constitutes the single reason you need to be afraid of them. America has tried hard to prevent this from happening, but it still has happened.