---
layout: post
title:  "EBPG CAD"
date:   2016-08-24 23:14:00
---

# EBPG CAD

## 0. Transfer `.DXF` file to TU Delft server

Protocol: `SFTP`

Server: `sftp.tudelft.nl`

Username: `NetID`

Password: `NetID password`

## 1. Transfer `.DXF` file to Pegasus

Protocol: `SFTP`

Server: `pegasus.kavli.tudelft.nl`

Username: `cad`

Password: `&KN-lab`

## 2. Use Layout Beamer on Pegasus to export to GPF files

Protocol: `SSH`

Server: `pegasus.kavli.tudelft.nl`

Username: `cad`

Password: `&KN-lab`

Command: `LB`

Import DXF -> Extract (one layer each) -> Heal (resolve overlay in patterns) -> Export

__Export__: estimate the _beam step size_ according to the desired _beam spot size_ for each layer as $\text{step size} = \text{spot size}/1.5$ (resolution=beam step size).

Beam spot sizes of each beam can be found by logging onto the EBPG computer and use command `fegmode estimate`. E.g. for pads we can use the largest beam spot size. On EBPG5200 this is 132nm so we can set the beam step size to be 88nm (=132nm/1.5). Similarly we can use the 30nm beam for coarse features (and thus 20nm step size) and for the smallest fine features we can set the beam step size to be 2nm and use the 3nm beam.

Then use `putp` or `putp5200` to transfer the `GPF` files to the EBPG computer. Use the wild card to save time in the following way:

	putp 20160824\*.gpf

This will transfer all `GPF` files with names beginning with `20160824` to the old EBPG.

## 3. Use `CJOB` on the EBPG computers

Protocol: `SSH`

Server: `epic-beta.kavli.tudelft.nl` / `epic-alfa.kavli.tudelft.nl`

Username: `pg`

Password: `pg5200@Delft` / `pg5000@Delft`

Command: `cjob`

Open an example `CJOB` file and modify the corresponding parts.

For each _exposure_ we specify four markers. For different exposures different markers should be used.

Be sure to select the correct file, beam and dose.

Finally export each exposure as a `.job` file.