---
layout: post
title:  "Richter | Trump"
date:   2017-02-16
---

Sviatoslav Richter is officially my favorite pianist now. Gives me chills every time I listen to him. E.g. [this final movement of Beethoven Sonata No. 23 (Appassionata)](https://itun.es/us/AsF7x?i=401470629).

---

On American politics. The USA is clearly going through a constitutional crisis now given what's been happening in the past few weeks after Donald Trump has been sworn in as the new president. According to the NPR Politics interview last night (Feb 15th), the current situation in Washington is a "train wreck". Seems this era will be remembered by history as a major event the significance of which is at least on the same level with the Andrew Jackson presidency, and maybe on par with FDR or even getting close to Lincoln.

My hope before the election was for Donald Trump to win, but not because I liked him – quite the contrary. I only hoped so because of this single belief: if Hillary Clinton wins, she will be more or less a continuation along the same path America has been on for decades, which has clearly not been working out well in recent years and has fostered some dark, extreme discontent among the angry white men. This dark mood has been growing at a staggering speed in the Obama years and will continue to do so in the next four if Hillary wins. If you find what you see now abhorrent, it will only get orders of magnitude worse after being suppressed for four more years. I.e., it is this single judgment I heard that led to me hoping this way: "Trump is not the Gracchi. But if you elect Hillary Clinton, there's a high chance the real Gracchi will appear in 2020. _That_ will genuinely signal the demise of American democracy." Or to put it in other words, "those who find themselves too virtuous to bend their knees and collaborate with Chiang Kai Shek will be taught how to behave by Mao; Trump is not an extremist like Mao after all". 

Therefore I hoped for Trump getting elected but then shortly after getting impeached for outrageous behaviors. This will serve as a "pressure release" process for the resentment accumulated among a lot of Americans. After all, given how strong the one million bureaucrats collectivevly in the Washington establishment are, he would either have to behave and find a way to navigate among them, or overreach too far and get stopped by the other power branches.

So indeed, I foresaw that Trump will test how strong the immune system of American politics is (i.e. the "checks and balances"). However, before the test really start to take shape, I didn't have an idea how ugly it would look. When your immune system is tested, even by a common flu, the body will inevitably feel pretty terrible. Also, I didn't fully grasp how authoritarian Trump is. A virus is a virus, after all. Even vaccines sometimes cause symptoms.

But what really disappoints me now is that the response of the immune system comes not from the power branches I (and I believe a lot of other people) expected: the Congress is completely controlled by Republicans so there's very little resistance from that side; Democrats, the media and hardcore left wingers are descending into this madness where they oppose everything Trump says and does and eventually discredit themselves entirely; the judiciary branch indeed starts to counter the acts of Trump on the Muslim ban but is regarded as a manifestation of the partisanship of judges now, which will only intensify the role politics plays in the courts and further harm the credibility of the judicial system. We could also look at this from a broader perspective: the Congress has been weakened a lot by the ever-increasing power of the "imperial presidency" after FDR; the judiciary system has been more and more politicized and are beginning to lose the trust of the public and their utmost authority; the "Fourth Power", the media, is becoming obsolete day by day after the rise of social media. Now who's the most effective in stopping presidential overreach?

The answer turns out to be not anyone the Founding Fathers wanted it to be – the intelligence community. CIA and the like. Washington bureaucrats. The opposite of an open society. The agencies that were founded largely in response to and as a mirror image of Soviet espionage. 

America has stared too long into the abyss, fought too long with the dragon and found its soul corrupted by them.

This time I really smell decline. Without any doubt and confirmed by so many other observers independently, America is in the late stage of the Roman Republic. The days of Trajan and Hadrian, the "most happy and prosperous age of humanity" are yet to come, but the times of infinite possibilities unimaginable to all but the divine are gone. 







