---
layout: post
title:  "On Denmark"
date:   2017-02-19
comments: true
---

I've very gradually come to notice the fact that the Nordic countries have actually very dinstinct cultures among themselves, rendering them often on almost opposite ends of the spectra of values.

Of these five countries, Denmark especially arouses my interest. It ranks among the most successful nation states. (Other candidates include Switzerland and UK; the Netherlands might make it if you really stretch it. The US is completely in another category. It should be compared with empires like Rome, not other nation states.) Sweden is far from it. However, not unlike the Netherlands, the extremely basic facts such as "tolerance is not the same as indifference" about these countries are very rarely known to people who've never lived there. So [this comment](http://disq.us/p/1az3ymj) I came upon does a great job explaining such basic facts in a few words. Everyone that has at some point in their lives marveled at how good lives in Nordic countries are but doesn't know much beyond  "much tax, much welfare, large social safety net"  should read them.

Here's the full paragraph, just in case the original source becomes unavailable later:

>   First off, I think it should be clear that while they are Nordic, Danes, Swedes, and Norwegians have developed substantial differences in culture. To give you one example, Denmark is a relatively libertarian state, while Sweden is a more authoritarian state which evolved from a strong monarchy. To oversimplify, Danes try to solve problems through social consensus, Swedes pass laws and enforce them. So when you talk about "Nordic culture" be careful not to think of them the same way.
>
>   My impression (from visits with my Danish relatives) is that any advantages Danes might have flow from culture and not laws or structures. From what I've seen, Danes tend to be less materialistic and more family and community oriented on average than I've seen in the U.S. But perhaps the biggest difference is the notion of "social responsibility" that pervades the culture. Danes feel it is important to work primarily because they should be contributing to society, while in the U.S. work tends to also revolve around identity, social position, and goods. Danes also typically don't have problem with their expensive social net, because they feel that it won't be abused because that would be the wrong thing to do. It's really these types of attitudes that have enabled Denmark to maintain a libertarian character while also retaining a strong social net.
>
>   I can understand why many of my Danish relatives wouldn't think of leaving Denmark, even with the perennially crummy weather. It would not be an economist's way of running a country (too many taxes, too many holidays, not enough crazy entrepreneurs and overly hard workers), but it provides enough for a society that is much less materialistic than ours. To give you an example, one of my uncles is a VP of Sales at an appliance manufacturer, but he is quite happy in his 1500 square foot one story with a modest yard in the suburbs of Copenhagen. And from what he told me this seemed pretty common and they were quite happy with what they had.
>
>   Danes have a high degree of social tolerance, although I think this may be tested as Denmark gets more immigrants. In part, I think this is because nearly all Danes live within 100 miles of another country, frequently speak a few languages (my cousins had to learn 3 languages to graduate from high school) and typically have traveled through a number of countries. But part of it is probably is because Danes have a pretty common set of social values as well.
>
>   I don't think it makes sense to try and emulate Denmark too much. We have a different culture, one that is more heterogeneous and dynamic than Denmark's. But I do wish we could get a healthy dose of some of the Danish values about tolerance, the importance of family and community, and less emphasis on material things. But in the end each culture has its different values and histories, and therefore it should come up with its own unique solutions and only use those solutions from other societies that fit its culture.

Interesting thought: the Danish values about family, education etc. mentioned here remind you of East Asians, don't they?

Also, this idea of "social cohesion", a certain empathy/"tender link"/common interests and values between the ruling elites and the common people, sounds very empty but more than a few people that have lived in Nordic countries say it's obviously tangible, alive and real. Although some claim that this cohesion has also shown the trend of being slowly eroded over the decades.