
Notebook Export


The Road to Serfdom: Text and Documents, The Definitive Edition



F. A. Hayek; Bruce Caldwell


------------------------------------------------------------------------



The most effective way of making everybody serve the single system of
ends toward which the social plan is directed is to make everybody
believe in those ends.

neither propaganda in itself nor the techniques employed are peculiar to
totalitarianism and that what so completely changes its nature and
effect in a totalitarian state is that all propaganda serves the same
goal—that all the instruments of propaganda are coordinated to influence
the individuals in the same direction and to produce the characteristic
Gleichschal-tung of all minds.2

If all the sources of current information are effectively under one
single control, it is no longer a question of merely persuading the
people of this or that. The skillful propagandist then has power to mold
their minds in any direction he chooses, and even the most intelligent
and independent people cannot entirely escape that influence if they are
long isolated from all other sources of information.

They are destructive of all morals because they undermine one of the
foundations of all morals: the sense of and the respect for truth.

From the nature of its task, totalitarian propaganda cannot confine
itself to values, to questions of opinion and moral convictions in which
the individual always will conform more or less to the views ruling his
community, but must extend to questions of fact where human intelligence
is involved in a different way.

in order to induce people to accept the official values, these must be
justified, or shown to be connected with the values already held by the
people, which usually will involve assertions about causal connections
between means and ends;

the distinction between ends and means, between the goal aimed at and
the measures taken to achieve it, is in fact never so clear cut

We have seen that agreement on that complete ethical code, that
all-comprehensive system of values which is implicit in an economic
plan, does not exist in a free society but would have to be created.

while the planning authority will constantly have to decide issues on
merits about which there exist no definite moral rules, it will have to
justify its decisions to the people—or, at least, have somehow to make
the people believe that they are the right decisions.

creating a “myth” to justify his action

All relkgions at their beginnings do this, the genesis myth. In this
sense communism is precisely a new religion. The extant religions have
survived Darwinian tests but communism hasn't.

the widespread dislike of the industrial civilization and a romantic
yearning for country life, together with a (probably erroneous) idea
about the special value of country people as soldiers, provide the basis
for another myth: Blut und Boden (“blood and soil”),

German romanticism is the same as non-Western culture's self-preserving
reactions against the sweeping force of industrialization.

The people are made to transfer their allegiance from the old gods to
the new under the pretense that the new gods really are what their sound
instinct had always told them but what before they had only dimly seen.
And the most efficient technique to this end is to use the old words but
change their meaning.

wherever liberty as we understand it has been destroyed, this has almost
always been done in the name of some new freedom promised to the people.

It is entirely in keeping with the whole spirit of totalitarianism that
it condemns any human activity done for its own sake and without
ulterior purpose.

Every activity must derive its justification from a conscious social
purpose. There must be no spontaneous, unguided activity, because it
might produce results which cannot be foreseen and for which the plan
does not provide.

Logos/spoken truth according to Jordan Peterson: speak the truth and see
what it brings about instead of trying to manipulate facts by twisting
truths.

This interaction of individuals, possessing different knowledge and
different views, is what constitutes the life of thought. The growth of
reason is a social process based on the existence of such differences.
It is of its essence that its results cannot be predicted, that we
cannot know which views will assist this growth and which will not—in
short, that this growth cannot be governed by any views which we now
possess without at the same time limiting it.

The tragedy of collectivist thought is that, while it starts out to make
reason supreme, it ends by destroying reason because it misconceives the
process on which the growth of reason depends.

It was certainly not through the bourgeoisie, but rather through the
absence of a strong bourgeoisie, that they were helped to power.

It was the union of the anticapitalist forces of the Right and of the
Left, the fusion of radical and conservative socialism, which drove out
from Germany everything that was liberal.

German thought became penetrated with Marxian elements in a way that was
true of no other country until the Russian revolution, this was in a
large measure due to Sombart.

this old socialist welcomed the “German War” as the inevitable conflict
between the commercial civilization of England and the heroic culture of
Germany.

Claims of the individual are always an outcome of the commercial spirit.
“The ideas of 1789”—liberty, equality, fraternity—are characteristically
commercial ideals which have no other purpose but to secure certain
advantages to individuals.

Before 1914 all the true German ideals of a heroic life were in deadly
danger before the continuous advance of English commercial ideals,
English comfort, and English sport.

the “Ideas of 1789,” the ideal of freedom, and the “Ideas of 1914,” the
ideal of organization.

The war between England and Germany is therefore really a conflict
between two opposite principles. The “Economic World War” is the third
great epoch of spiritual struggle in modern history. It is of equal
importance with the Reformation and the bourgeois revolution of liberty.
It is the struggle for the victory of the new forces born out of the
advanced economic life of the nineteenth century: socialism and
organization.

At first Professor Plenge still hoped to reconcile the ideal of liberty
and the ideal of organization, although largely through the complete but
voluntary submission of the individual to the whole. But these traces of
liberal ideas soon disappear from his writings. By 1918 the union
between socialism and ruthless power politics had become complete in his
mind. Shortly before the end of the war he exhorted his compatriots in
the socialist journal Die Glocke in the following manner: “It is high
time to recognize the fact that socialism must be power policy, because
it is to be organization. Socialism has to win power: it must never
blindly destroy power.

The ideals which Plenge expressed so clearly were especially popular
among, and perhaps even derive from, certain circles of German
scientists and engineers who, precisely as is now so loudly demanded by
their English and American counterparts, clamored for the centrally
planned organization of all aspects of life.

the German race, have discovered the significance of organization. While
the other nations still live under the regime of individualism, we have
already achieved that of organization.”17

“The result of Bismarck’s decision of the year 1879 was that Germany
took on the role of the revolutionary; that is to say, of a state whose
position in relation to the rest of the world is that of a
representative of a higher and more advanced economic system.

our conceptions of Liberalism, Democracy, and so forth, are derived from
the ideas of English Individualism, according to which a state with a
weak government is a liberal state, and every restriction upon the
freedom of the individual is conceived as the product of autocracy and
militarism.”22

“Since the Social Democrats, by the aid of this \[universal\] Suffrage,
occupied every post which they could obtain in the Reichstag, the State
Parliament, the municipal councils, the courts for the settlement of
trade disputes, the sick funds, and so forth, they penetrated very
deeply into the organism of the state; but the price which they had to
pay for this was that the state, in its turn, exercised a profound
influence upon the working classes.

“The three last nations of the Occident have aimed at three forms of
existence, represented by famous watchwords: Freedom, Equality,
Community.

“The fight against the capitalistic order, according to this view, is a
continuation of the war against the Entente with the weapons of the
spirit and of economic organization,

fifteen years ago the possibility of such a thing’s happening in Germany
would have appeared just as fantastic, not only to nine-tenths of the
Germans themselves, but also to the most hostile foreign observers

“we can no longer find much meaning in the distinction familiar to
nineteenth-century thought between ‘society’ and ‘state,’” that this is
precisely the doctrine of Professor Carl Schmitt, the leading Nazi
theoretician of totalitarianism and, in fact, the essence of the
definition of totalitarianism

“scientific” organization of society. The ideal of a society organized
“through and through” from the top has in Germany been considerably
furthered by the quite unique influence which her scientific and
technological specialists were allowed to exercise on the formation of
social and political opinions.

in the modern history of Germany the political professors have played a
role comparable to that of the political lawyers in France.28

The way in which, in the end, with few exceptions, her scholars and
scientists put themselves readily at the service of the new rulers is
one of the most depressing and shameful spectacles in the whole history
of the rise of National Socialism.30

Becuse they are not "organic" intellectuals. They rely on the top, not
the bttom, the local community, to acquire and exercise their power.

“superstition of science held to be competent in all domains, including
that of morality; a superstition which, I repeat, is an acquisition of
the nineteenth century.

the dogma that history is obedient to scientific laws is preached
especially by partisans of arbitrary authority.

the scientist is qualified to run a totalitarian society is based mainly
on his thesis that “science can pass ethical judgment on human
behavior”—a

Sam Harris

Apart from the intellectual influences which we have illustrated by two
instances, the impetus of the movement toward totalitarianism comes
mainly from the two great vested interests: organized capital and
organized labor.

Even if railways, road and air transport, or the supply of gas and
electricity were all inevitably monopolies, the consumer is
unquestionably in a much stronger position so long as they remain
separate monopolies than when they are “coordinated” by a central
control.

Private monopoly is scarcely ever complete and even more rarely of long
duration or able to disregard potential competition.

The American monopolies are precisely not immune to potential
competition, i.e. disruptors.

Where the power which ought to check and control monopoly becomes
interested in sheltering and defending its appointees, where for the
government to remedy an abuse is to admit responsibility for it, and
where criticism of the actions of monopoly means criticism of the
government, there is little hope of monopoly becoming the servant of the
community.

Even if this should have the effect (as it sometimes had with American
public utilities) that the services of the monopolistic industries would
become less satisfactory than they might be, this would be a small price
to pay for an effective check on the powers of monopoly.

Is he saying we should be vigilent of any monopolistic power, no matter
wielded by private companies or governments?

The recent growth of monopoly is largely the result of a deliberate
collaboration of organized capital and organized labor where the
privileged groups of labor share in the monopoly profits at the expense
of the community and particularly at the expense of the poorest, those
employed in the less-well-organized industries and the unemployed.

There is no other possibility than either the order governed by the
impersonal discipline of the market or that directed by the will of a
few individuals; and those who are out to destroy the first are
wittingly or unwittingly helping to create the second.

“the scientist, per se, is hence, perhaps, the most easily used and
‘coordinated’ of all the especially trained people in modern society.
The Nazis, to be true, fired a good many University professors, and
dismissed a good many scientists from research laboratories. But the
professors were primarily among the social sciences where there was more
common awareness of and a more persistent criticism of the Nazi
programmes, and not among the natural sciences where thinking is
supposed to be most rigorous.

This revolt is an instance of a much more general phenomenon, a new
unwillingness to submit to any rule or necessity the rationale of which
man does not understand;

A complex civilization like ours is necessarily based on the
individual’s adjusting himself to changes whose cause and nature he
cannot understand: why he should have more or less, why he should have
to move to another occupation, why some things he wants should become
more difficult to get than others, will always be connected with such a
multitude of circumstances that no single mind will be able to grasp
them;

it is infinitely more difficult rationally to comprehend the necessity
of submitting to forces whose operation we cannot follow in detail than
to do so out of the humble awe which religion, or even the respect for
the doctrines of economics, did inspire.

The refusal to yield to forces which we neither understand nor can
recognize as the conscious decisions of an intelligent being is the
product of an incomplete and therefore erroneous rationalism. It is
incomplete because it fails to comprehend that the coordination of the
multifarious individual efforts in a complex society must take account
of facts no individual can completely survey. And it fails to see that,
unless this complex society is to be destroyed, the only alternative to
submission to the impersonal and seemingly irrational forces of the
market is submission to an equally uncontrollable and therefore
arbitrary power of other men. In his anxiety to escape the irksome
restraints which he now feels, man does not realize that the new
authoritarian restraints which will have to be deliberately imposed in
their stead will be even more painful.

they are mistaken when they carry the comparison further and argue that
we must learn to master the forces of society in the same manner in
which we have learned to master the forces of nature. This is not only
the path to totalitarianism but the path to the destruction of our
civilization and a certain way to block future progress.

the mere preservation of what we have so far achieved depends on the
coordination of individual efforts by impersonal forces.

The only exception to the rule that a free society must not be subjected
to a single purpose is war and other temporary disasters when
subordination of almost everything to the immediate and pressing need is
the price at which we preserve our freedom in the long run.

That no single purpose must be allowed in peace to have absolute
preference over all others applies even to the one aim which everybody
now agrees comes in the front rank: the conquest of unemployment.

the one decisive factor in the rise of totalitarianism on the Continent,
which is yet absent in England and America, is the existence of a large
recently dispossessed middle class.

The one thing modern democracy will not bear without cracking is the
necessity of a substantial lowering of the standards of living in
peacetime or even prolonged stationariness of its economic conditions.

Are not the things which we are more and more frequently taught to
regard as “nineteenth-century illusions” all moral values—liberty and
independence, truth and intellectual honesty, peace and democracy, and
the respect for the individual qua man instead of merely as the member
of an organized group?

the virtues which are held less and less in esteem and which
consequently become rarer are precisely those on which Anglo-Saxons
justly prided themselves and in which they were generally recognized to
excel. The virtues these people possessed—in a higher degree than most
other people, excepting only a few of the smaller nations, like the
Swiss and the Dutch—were independence and self-reliance, individual
initiative and local responsibility, the successful reliance on
voluntary activity, noninterference with one’s neighbor and tolerance of
the different and queer, respect for custom and tradition, and a healthy
suspicion of power and authority.

The English hardly know to what degree they differ from most other
people in that they all, irrespective of party, hold to a greater or
less extent the ideas which in their most pronounced form are known as
liberalism.

The Left intelligentsia, indeed, have so long worshiped foreign gods
that they seem to have become almost incapable of seeing any good in the
characteristic English institutions and traditions.

Of all checks on democracy, federation has been the most efficacious and
the most congenial. . . . The federal system limits and restrains the
sovereign power by dividing it and by assigning to Government only
certain defined rights. It is the only method of curbing not only the
majority but the power of the whole people. —Lord Acton1

In no other field has the world yet paid so dearly for the abandonment
of nineteenth-century liberalism as in the field where the retreat
began: in international relations.

there is little hope of international order or lasting peace so long as
every country is free to employ whatever measures it thinks desirable in
its own immediate interest, however damaging they may be to others,

If the resources of different nations are treated as exclusive
properties of these nations as wholes, if international economic
relations, instead of being relations between individuals, become
increasingly relations between whole nations organized as trading
bodies, they inevitably become the source of friction and envy between
whole nations.

would transfer to powerful and armed states, subject to no superior law,
the rivalries which between individuals had to be decided without
recourse to force.

Economic transactions between national bodies who are at the same time
the supreme judges of their own behavior, who bow to no superior law,
and whose representatives cannot be bound by any considerations but the
immediate interest of their respective nations, must end in clashes of
power.2

the principle of federation is the only form of association of different
peoples which will create an international order without putting an
undue strain on their legitimate desire for

It was only with the approach of our twentieth century that before the
triumphant rise of Realpolitik these hopes came to be regarded as
unpracticable and utopian.

It is no accident that on the whole there was more beauty and decency to
be found in the life of the small peoples,

Least of all shall we preserve democracy or foster its growth if all the
power and most of the important decisions rest with an organization far
too big for the common man to survey or comprehend. Nowhere has
democracy ever worked well without a great measure of local
self-government, providing a school of political training for the people
at large as much as for their future leaders. It is only where
responsibility can be learned and practiced in affairs with which most
people are familiar, where it is the awareness of one’s neighbor rather
than some theoretical knowledge of the needs of other people which
guides action, that the ordinary man can take a real part in public
affairs because they concern the world he knows. Where the scope of the
political measures becomes so large that the necessary knowledge is
almost exclusively possessed by the bureaucracy, the creative impulses
of the private person must flag.

the experience of the small countries like Holland and Switzerland
contains much from which even the most fortunate larger countries like
Great Britain can learn. We shall all be the gainers if we can create a
world fit for small states to live in.

But the small can preserve their independence in the international as in
the national sphere only within a true system of law which guarantees
both that certain rules are invariably enforced and that the authority
which has the power to enforce these cannot use it for any other
purpose.

While for its task of enforcing the common law the supernational
authority must be very powerful, its constitution must at the same time
be so designed that it prevents the international as well as the
national authorities from becoming tyrannical.

We shall never prevent the abuse of power if we are not prepared to
limit power in a way which occasionally may also prevent its use for
desirable purposes.

The great opportunity we shall have at the end of this war is that the
great victorious powers, by themselves first submitting to a system of
rules which they have the power to enforce, may at the same time acquire
the moral right to impose the same rules upon others.

Neither an omnipotent superstate nor a loose association of “free
nations” but a community of nations of free men must be our goal.

a degree of cooperation could be achieved between, say, the British
Empire and the nations of western Europe and probably the United States
which would not be possible on a world scale.

Though we neither can wish nor possess the power to go back to the
reality of the nineteenth century, we have the opportunity to realize
its ideals—and they were not mean.

The persecution of the Marxists, and of democrats in general, tends to
obscure the fundamental fact that National Socialism is a genuine
socialist movement, whose leading ideas are the final fruit of the
anti-liberal tendencies which have been steadily gaining ground in
Germany since the later part of the Bismarckian era, and which led the
majority of the German intelligentsia first to “socialism of the chair”
and later to Marxism in its social-democratic or communist form.

this is the most characteristic feature of modern Germany—many
capitalists are themselves strongly influenced by socialistic ideas, and
have not sufficient belief in capitalism to defend it with a clear
conscience.

the opposition of the Nazis to the established socialist parties, which
gained them the sympathy of the entrepreneur, was only to a very small
extent directed against their economic policy. What the Nazis mainly
objected to was their internationalism and all the aspects of their
cultural programme which were still influenced by liberal ideas.

That the movement is more anti-liberal than anything else is closely
connected with another important aspect of it—the anti-rational,
mystical and romantic sentiment, which has been growing for years among
the youth of Germany.

all the different intellectual sources of these anti-rational tendencies
in art and literature which have all converged—often to the amazement
and consternation of their originators—in the Nazi movement.

the main influence which destroyed the belief in the universality and
unity of human reason was Marx’ teaching of the class-conditioned nature
of our thinking,

from this intellectual relativism, which denied the existence of truths
which could be recognised independently of race, nation, or class, there
was only a step to the position which puts sentiment above rational
thinking.

That anti-liberalism and anti-rationalism are so intimately bound up
with one another is easy to understand, and is, in fact, inevitable.

The collectivist and anti-individualist character of German National
Socialism is not much modified by the fact that it is not a proletarian
but a middle class socialism, and that it is, in consequence, inclined
to favour the small artisan and shop keeper and to set the limit up to
which it recognises private property somewhat higher than does
communism.

the real meaning of the German revolution is that the long dreaded
expansion of communism into the heart of Europe has taken place but is
not recognised because the fundamental similarity of methods and ideas
is hidden by the difference in the phraseology and the privileged
groups.

they had observed a collectivist organization in action. For them,
Hayek’s predictions about the consequences of collectivism were not
simply hypothetical possibilities but visible realities that they had
themselves experienced in the military.

It is tempting to believe that social evils arise from the activities of
evil men and that if only good men (like ourselves, naturally) wielded
power, all would be well.

The argument for collectivism is simple if false; it is an immediate
emotional argument. The argument for individualism is subtle and
sophisticated; it is an indirect rational argument. And the emotional
faculties are more highly developed in most men than the rational,
paradoxically or especially even in those who regard themselves as
intellectuals.

The tradition of liberty, the liberal values, were still sufficiently
strong in Britain so that, when the conflict occurred, central planning
was sacrificed rather than individual liberty.

“Unfortunately, the check to collectivism did not check the growth of
government; rather, it diverted its growth to a different channel.

“Yet despite this remarkable and dramatic confirmation of Hayek’s
thesis, the intellectual climate of the West, after a brief interlude in
which there were some signs of the resurgence of earlier liberal values,
has again started moving in a direction strongly antagonistic to free
enterprise, competition, private property and limited government.

But Thatcher was unable to call on anything like the reservoir of
popular support for liberal values that led to the withdrawal of the
“control of engagements” order shortly after World War II.
