---
layout: post
title:  "SARS-nCoV-2 thoughts"
date:   2020-03-15 14:19:00
---

The reason I think SARS-nCoV-2 will have an outsized influence on history is mostly because how anthromophically ironic this virus is. It puts under the magnifier and exposes all the shortcomings of each and every aspect of each society. "21st century is the Chinese century" and "21st century is the century of life sciences." Well there you go. I'm skipping China here not because the problems there are fewer in number, but rather the contrary. It'll require tomes of big history books. The tragedies and atrocities.

European and Americans: turns out ignoring the human right abuses in China and enjoying its unethically cheap labor as a result of draconian domestic and imperial repression (HK, TW, Tibet, Xinjiang) has consequences. Now that China controls the manufacturing of the whole world, what is there to do when it threatens to not export medical equipments to its foe during such a pandemic? If we delve into muddier waters, there's even reason to believe this virus itself is not entirely unlikely the result of a leaked lab effort at bioweapons. A big, fat price for the West for enjoying cheap labor. Whichever society cannot cure itself of the dependency on Chinese cheap labor will be ruining the will of itself to drive forward and only belong to the trash bin of future history.

Again at grander scales, a pandemic is a perfect test for the vulnerability of a leftist society. [SSC commented](https://slatestarcodex.com/2013/03/04/a-thrivesurvive-theory-of-the-political-spectrum/) on the fundamental common thread throughout history tying together the divide between liberal and conservative values: the former is the optimal strategy for thriving in a safe environment while the latter for surviving a harsh one. Europeans in particular and the global liberal elites in general will have to come to term with the very fundamental fact that their ideology does not square with reality once a real crisis hits. Now you have the impossible triangle: 1) socioeconomic life as normal; 2) no skyrocketing mortality due to overwhelmed hospitals; and 3) reduced virus spreading e.g. due to herd immunity or vaccine before end of year. Maybe it's time to concede, the old wisdoms of human societies are not sources of all evil, but rather were sometimes essential to the survival of the society? Well, maybe they won't, and it's alright because that is how history moves forward: the ones that refuse to adapt to new environments will die out and their ideology is no longer heard.

The ineptitude of EU at dealing with such moments. EU proves to have built no real cohesive power on the ground that will sustain a society through a crisis like this while Italians are receiving zero aid from Brussels and are cheering each other up every 6pm by singing their local and national anthems. The mad Guy Verhofstadt is still shouting "virus knows no borders" like a clown. These imperialist Eurocrats seem to have no grasp of reality and are simply spouting out their preprogrammed slogans of "open borders!" every other second. What the hell does "virus knows no borders" even mean? That one would not be able to stop the spread of a virus by closing borders? That's just nonsensical gibberish because no one needs to be told the virus needs a host to spread and if you close the borders to the host you also cutoff the spread of the virus itself. "Virus knows no borders" would probably be a lot more meaningful if it were used to warn Europeans of their conceit when the virus first came knocking at their doors. It simply did not occur to them that what's happening in China could have at least the theoretical possibility of coming at themselves. To [borrow a phrase](https://quillette.com/2020/03/14/conceit-and-contagion-how-the-virus-shocked-europe/), most Europeans' idea of China is a weird mix of Nigeria and USSR (and perhaps with a dash of Black Mirror in very recent years). 
